so a question i get asked all the time
as an astronomer and astrophysicist
is why do we even bother studying the
universe
why do we even bother funding research
into black holes and dark matter and
how big the universe is if that doesn't
have
any direct benefit to society you know
especially when we could be funding
medical research or research into newer
and better technologies that will
improve
all our lives essentially sort of like
what have astronomers ever done
for us what have the romans ever done
for us
but the thing is astrophysics research
does benefit society just
in ways you might not have guessed it's
very indirect and it does take a couple
of decades
to trickle down to benefit things like
medicine and new technologies and even
the phone
in your pocket so let's dive into this
what has astronomy
ever done for us so let's start with the
most basic of those questions right like
why we even bother doing astrophysics
research why do i
bother you know dedicating my life to
doing my research on supermassive black
holes
and for me it's just for curiosity's
sake right i think humans are naturally
curious it's what made us ask you know
what's at the top of that mountain or
what's over
that ocean and it's the same drive that
makes us ask you know how do black holes
grow
in my case or how many other planets are
there in the universe that
can hold life like ours and are we alone
in the universe and how big
is the universe so satiating my
curiosity about supermassive black holes
is the reason that i
do astrophysics right it's the reason
why i publish my research in a journal
as well in the hope of satiating others
curiosities on the topic
and also it's why i do science
communication right too because i want
to say shake your curiosity on
all that's going on in research at the
minute but that's not enough for
everyone
it's definitely not enough for your
funding applications either
so the reason we fund astrophysics
research is
really for all of the unforeseen
benefits
that come out of it the advancements uh
in technology or the inventions that
come
from asking these big astrophysics or
cosmological
questions there's many examples of this
i've just picked out three to highlight
today
that have come direct from astrophysics
research and are now benefiting society
first up is wi-fi so if you
are watching this video right now using
your wi-fi
you've got astronomers to thank for it
and that is because sending signals
wirelessly inside homes
and buildings is actually really
difficult and that's because
these signals bounce off everything
walls objects and just
scatter all over the place it weakens
your signal
and the speed of your wi-fi reduces so
when wi-fi was first developed it was
never really used because
well the speed was so so slow
what you need obviously is a way of
recombining all of those
scattered signals so you increase the
signal strength that you receive
wirelessly and
therefore speed up your wi-fi who
figured all that out
radio astronomers so radio astronomy
really suffered in its early days sort
of after world war ii because they just
really couldn't
get the same level of detail as an
optical telescope with a radio telescope
and that's because of something called
angular resolution essentially when you
talk about the angular resolution of a
telescope you're talking about what's
the smallest thing they can see on the
sky
in terms of like its angular size so if
you imagine the sky is 360 degrees round
the moon half a degree across right so
if you're trying to look at a star
it's even smaller a fraction of a degree
if you're trying to look at something
even further away it's
it's what we start getting down to what
we call arc minutes and arc seconds so
an arc minute is a 60th of a degree
an arc second is the 60th of an arc
minute they're all angles but they're
incredibly incredibly
small and that angle in terms of like
how small of that thing you can see
is dependent on the wavelength of light
you're using
divided by the diameter of your
telescope
so something like an optical telescope
which has
what 600 nanometer wavelength and about
a
2 meter wide telescope you're still
going to be able to see something
pretty small but if you up that
wavelength into the
radio waves around meters or so
then you're not going to be able to see
anywhere near the same level of detail
so if you want to achieve the same level
of detail with a radio telescope
you also need to massively increase the
size of your telescope as well which is
why we've seen over the years
bigger and bigger telescopes built all
the time from the
level telescope at jodrell banked the
arecibo observatory to fast in china you
have these huge huge dishes but
eventually
you kind of reach the limits of what
engineering can actually build in
a single telescope that can collect as
much light
as possible so radio astronomers
developed a new technique that allowed
them to combine lots of
little telescopes together to make a
much larger one that was either
kilometers across
or even more recently the size of the
earth
itself what do they need to be able to
do that though they needed a way to
combine
all those different signals from the
different telescopes coherently
together and it's exactly the same
method that's used to boost your wi-fi
signal
in your house after it scatters off all
the different objects on its way
to you not only that but it's the same
process that's used to reconstruct an
image of your body
after an mri scan an mri scan detects
radio waves that are coming from
individual water molecules in your body
that are vibrating and so it needs a way
to recombine all the signals from the
individual water molecules together
to give you this coherent picture
all of that from radio astronomers just
wanting to be able
to see things in a little bit more
detail
next up charged coupled devices aka
very first digital cameras so astronomy
and astrophysics
really are observational sciences right
we're all about
images and image processing and so
because that's so central to the science
the way we
take those observations has massively
changed over the centuries you know from
a simple hand-drawn sketch to using a
very
sort of big bulky photographic plate
that had to be
exposed and then developed you know sort
of in the same way that camera film
used to be but it means that you know
because we are
science you want to do that in the most
precise and accurate way that you can
now one of the main things you want to
measure in astronomy and astrophysics
is the brightness of an object that's
really hard to do
on a on a piece of film or a
photographic plate right when all you
can do is really
compare how bright one object is with an
other you don't get some accurate
measurement of say this is the number of
particles of light that hit this
specific part
of your image like you would in say a
digital sensor
of some form and so it was astronomers
that really
pushed for that technology to be
developed a digital detector that would
record on each part of the image
how much light hit that area that
invention
finally came in 1969 from physicists at
bell laboratories including george smith
and willard boyle and eventually then
that trickled back down to astronomers
as well
astronomy was the first to use this new
invention they were put on telescopes
very famously chosen by the hubble space
telescope development team back late 70s
early 80s as well
to be used and then the technology has
evolved from there changed a little bit
we've got the detectors a lot smaller as
well until now the time
that we use them you know every single
day
either on a camera or on our phones as
well i mean i guess you could say
that we have astronomers to thank for
selfies and i'll let you decide if
that's a good thing or a bad thing
and finally number three image analysis
techniques it probably comes as no
surprise to anyone after hearing before
that you know that astronomy and
astrophysics are the science of imaging
to hear that they have pushed forward
developments and improvements to
the way that we analyze and process
images because essentially what we do
when we get an image from a telescope
that is a raw
image it has you know the thing that we
care about the object whether it's a
star or a galaxy or whatever in it
but it also has many other sources of
noise in that whether that's scattered
light around
earth's atmosphere or whether it's
actually noise
from the detector itself all those
sources of noise need to be accounted
for
and removed by processing the image to
essentially
clear it up somewhat how do you do that
well you need
the tools and the programs and the
programming languages that can deal
with image data things like idl
and iraf that were all developed by
astronomers and astrophysicists
which over the years have seen
improvements in the algorithms and
routines that are available
to help remove these sources of noise
and clear up
images it's now the exact same languages
and techniques and routines that are
used
across many different industries but
also medicine
again every time you go for a scan your
doctor maybe does a ct
scan or an mri scan they're going to
take that raw
image from the scanner and then remove
all the sources of noise clear it up so
they can see what they
care about the thing that they're trying
to look at
in your body and diagnose and test all
right but apart from the sanitation the
medicine
education wine public order irrigation
road the fresh water system and public
health
what has the romans ever done for us so
that's just three things that have come
off the back of funding astronomy and
astrophysics research
over the decades you know from asking
questions like
how big is that black hole or what's the
most distant galaxy
we've seen so many benefits to our lives
you know every day sure it's taken a
fair few years for those benefits to
trickle through
but they are there if you want to know
more i've linked a great article from
the international astronomical union
which lists even more ways astronomy has
benefited society
including computing timing things and
also communications as well
so one thing that i like to speculate on
which i think is fun is to think about
what's going on in astrophysics research
now
that we're sort of pushing for
technology to be advanced sort of in
that area
that will then eventually trickle down
into you know
industry and society and say 10 or 20
years
time and i was thinking about something
my office mate said to me
last year so she's a radio astronomer
again she works on
lofa which is one of these huge radio
telescope arrays
across much of northern europe and she
said the telescope is actually taking
data and storing it
locally faster then they can
actually transfer that data from the
local storage to
their laptops or their super computers
to actually do
the astrophysical analysis on it and i
was thinking about
how much of our society is actually
relying on
data transfers it's kind of scary if you
start to think about it
but it does mean that if we're pushing
for faster transfer speeds for
this strange reason to do with astronomy
it could trickle down to that
infrastructure in the next 20 years and
improve
you know the speeds of information
transfer and data transfer
whether that's communications or perhaps
bank transfers or whatever it might be
and it just really makes you stop and
think that all of that could come
from this one telescope this one
telescope that
on paper when it was designed
had no obvious immediate impact or
benefit
to society in any way shape or form
but can it have these huge ripple
effects
down the line the reason it was built
is just because we as humans were
curious
curious enough to build a telescope
that works using the exact same method
that wi-fi uses to
bring all your signals back together in
order to answer a big astrophysical
question
of when did the first stars form
oh peace shut up
a big thank you to this week's video
sponsor brilliant brilliant is a website
with a lot of
interactive courses on loads of
different areas of science
and maths courses are really engaging
plus
they get you to start approaching
problems in a really
logical way in the same way that a
scientist would and
really really fun too if you're
intrigued by what the future holds for
us in terms of computing you might like
to brush up on some of the fundamentals
behind how computers
work maybe the science of algorithms or
even computer memory as well
this course starts with what it means to
store
and retrieve data from a computer and
uses that as a jumping off point into
one of the most
thorough courses i've ever seen online
on this topic it'll definitely prepare
any budding computer
scientists out there for the future when
as astronomers start demanding faster
data transfer speeds
so if that sounds like something that
you'd be up for and you want to support
me
and my channel head to brilliant.org
forward slash
dr becky that's d-r-b-e-c-k-y the link
is in the description below and it lets
them know that i sent you and you'll be
able to sign up completely
for free plus the first 200 people that
go to that link will get 20
off an annual premium subscription so
thank you to brilliant
for bringing a little more knowledge
into the world
who knows where that knowledge might
someday lead someone
and one more quick thing from me editing
becky i know it's been ages since i've
popped up
hasn't it i am actually going to be on
the sky at night
this sunday the 13th of december at 22
30 that's half past 10
over on bbc four so for all of you in
the uk who are
massive fans of the show just like me
you'll know how much of a big deal this
is and how excited i am so i hope you
all tune in
all right well apart from sanitation
what are the romans ever done for us
eh but also it's the reason i do science
communication on youtube too in the hope
of youtube chew
youtube chew
[Music]
via wi-fi the first
up is wi-fi i've said
wi-fi so many times now it sounds wrong
what you need is a way of recombining
all of those
scattered signals into a stronger signal
so you get a stronger
wi-fi speed stronger wifi speed
faster wi-fi speed my winter nights are
taken up
by astronomy stress
and research proposal deadlines